On the afternoon of May 30, 2017, law.MIT.edu will convene a creative, online discussion and design oriented event among invited participants involved with initiatives to use blockchain and other emerging technologies for individually controlled digital identity.  On the afternoon of May 18th, law.MIT.edu will convene an online pre-event focused on identifying and prioritizing the main issues, questions, ideas and other topics participants most want to discuss.

The current plan is to use the following tools for both the preliminary and main events:

1. A conference call using regular phone (landline or mobile);
2. Screensharing at a standard URL using "join.me" 
3. Small group collaboration using Google Docs; and 
4. Announcements and continuous chat through Slack 

Some participants have expressed reluctance about using Slack and I am curretly seeking input on other potential chat options. 

To help identify good potential alternatives, this post describes the intended purpose and functions of chat for these sorts of meeting.  It may seem like one could just use Slack or Google Docs but these tools are best suited for quite different tasks. As part of the online events on May 18th and 30th, a chat application or service is intended to provide:  

* The meeting organizer a way to make periodic updates and announcements with links to what is happening now and next (with quick reference call-in number and link to the relevant Google Doc for breakout group sessions and reminder agenda item with relevant link to the join.me screenshare for the big group sessions); and 

* The meeting participants a way to easily "get a word in edgewise" during full group or small group conference call discussions, and to quickly share links or other info relevant to whatever is being discussed at the moment.  

At a very high level, chat is a good tool for discussion and perhaps agreement about something and Docs as a good tool for designing and perhaps building something.  Slack - or any other chat tool - is intended to provide all participants a mechanism for contribution to the group discussion happening at any given moment. Google Docs, on the other hand, is intended to enable everybody to contribute to whatever artifact a group may be working on together such as a document, spreadsheet or slide deck for "report out" notes or for a table (eg to draft the proposed blockchain tech/legal requirement matrix) or for listing out key questions/issues or presenting an idea, etc. 

The purpose of using Slack (or some kind of real-time, all-hands chat) is to improve upon the "one participant at a time" meeting method and "extemporaneous speech" meeting medium with a process for "every participant contributes the questions/comments/ideas most relevant at any given moment".  I've noticed that meetings that enable one person speaking at a time (as usual) and simultaneous chat can allow more efficient, effective and engaging experiences.  Hybrid meetings with spoken and written extemporaneous chat are emerging as a new model for discussion, deliberation, debate and even light-weight decision making (eg with judicious use of polling or other prioritization mechanisms).  

The primary motivation for providing the capability of equal access to "the floor" by every participant through the real-time and simultaneous chat is to enlarge the number of contributors, broaden the range of views and increase the rate of idea flow.   For purposes of the meetings this month, contributions via the written chat-based medium of communication are expected to be secondary to the spoken phone-based communication medium, but there is technically no reason this must be the case.  

I've noticed that sometimes the line between contributing to building a common "document" type of artifact and contributing remarks to a chat about the document can become thin or dissapear altogether.  For instance, contributions to a discussion about proposed changes to a document can be instantly transformed through copy/paste into contributions that modify the document itself. Chat content can be funneled into final production it is about building knowledge products such as books, technical specifications and even statutes. 

Groups using chat as part of collaborations to build non-document types of artifacts would probably use tools better suited to what they are building than Google Docs.  To the extent chat is for an idea to modify or replace some aspect of design or development of an artifact, the line between "discussion about the thing" and "building the thing" may also blur.  For example, groups collaborating to develop software can use chat to offer improved or alternative formulations of code which can then become updates to the overall software (eg using GitHub), groups working on music videos can directly incorporate proposed special effects settings or alternative sequences of edits (eg using XML-based FinalCut Pro X workflows), teams working on building blueprints can propose alternative dimensions or specify different building materials in ways that can be directly imported to update the current deign (eg using Autodesk cloud and online CAD), groups collaborating on data analytics or statistical models can use chat to discuss modified or alternative datasets, algorithms, scripts, etc which can be directly incorporated into a shared project  (eg using Dataiku or dashDB on IBM Bluemix cloud platform), etc, etc, etc. 

There is also some important, though non-substantive, properties of chat that deserve a mention.  Chat can provide a very useful way for the meeting participants and organizer to rapidly raise and resolve logistical, technical, administrative, process-oriented or other such issues.  Another nice byproduct of using chat as an important meeting dimension is the record of discussions can be a lot richer than what is available from slogging through recordings of people making little speeches one at a time.  Interestingly, these properties are not only useful for "conference call", "web-based" or other "remote participation" contexts but also for large in-person meetings such as conferences and conventions. The point is that designing chat as part of a meeting can be an overall value-multiplier by allowing people to focus much more of attention, energy and time on the substance of a meeting, whether they are engaging the discussion while it happens or engaging the record at a later time.

Watch law.MIT.edu and this page for relevant updates and announcements.  For more information and to request and application to participate in or contribute to one or both events, please contact us at: [http://law.mit.edu/contact](http://law.mit.edu/contact)
